

RAPUNZEL


There was once a man and a woman, who had long in vain wished for a
child. At length, the woman hoped that God was about to grant her
desire.

These people had a little window at the back of their house from which
a splendid garden could be seen. It was full of the most beautiful
flowers and herbs. It was, however, surrounded by a high wall, and no
one dared to go into it because it belonged to a Witch, who had great
power and was dreaded by all the world.

One day, the woman was standing by this window and looking down
into the garden, when she saw a bed which was planted with the most
beautiful rampion (rapunzel), and it looked so fresh and green that she
longed for it, and had the greatest desire to eat some.

This desire increased every day, and as she knew that she could not get
any of it, she quite pined away, and looked pale and miserable.

Then her husband was alarmed, and asked, “What ails you, dear Wife?”

“Ah,” she replied, “if I can’t get some of the rampion to eat, which is
in the garden behind our house, I shall die.”

The man, who loved her, thought, “Sooner than let your wife die, bring
her some of the rampion yourself, let it cost you what it will!”

In the twilight of evening, he clambered over the wall into the garden
of the Witch, hastily clutched a handful of rampion, and took it to
his wife. She at once made herself a salad of it, and ate it with much
relish.

She, however, liked it so much--so very much--that the next day she
longed for it three times as much as before. If he was to have any
rest, her husband must once more descend into the garden. In the gloom
of evening, therefore, he let himself down again. But when he had
clambered down the wall he was terribly afraid, for he saw the Witch
standing before him.

“How dare you,” said she with angry look, “descend into my garden and
steal my rampion like a thief? You shall suffer for it!”

“Ah,” answered he, “let mercy take the place of justice! I had to do it
out of necessity. My wife saw your rampion from the window, and felt
such a longing for it that she would have died, if she had not got some
to eat.”

Then the Witch let her anger be softened, and said to him, “If the case
be as you say, I will allow you to take away with you as much rampion
as you will, only I make one condition, you must give me the child
which your wife will bring into the world. It shall be well treated,
and I will care for it like a mother.”

The man in his terror consented to everything, and when the woman at
last had a little daughter, the Witch appeared at once, gave the child
the name of Rapunzel, and took it away with her.

Rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child beneath the sun. When she
was twelve years old, the Witch shut her into a tower, which lay in
a forest, and had neither stairs nor door. But quite at the top was
a little window. When the Witch wanted to go in, she placed herself
beneath this, and cried:

    “_Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
      Let down thy hair._”

Rapunzel had magnificent long hair, fine as spun gold, and when she
heard the voice of the Witch, she unfastened her braided tresses and
wound them round one of the hooks of the window above. And then the
hair fell twenty ells down, and the Witch climbed up by it.

After a year or two, it came to pass that the King’s Son rode through
the forest and went by the tower. Then he heard a song, which was so
charming that he stood still and listened. This was Rapunzel, who in
her solitude passed her time in letting her sweet voice resound.

The King’s Son wanted to climb up to her, and looked for the door of
the tower, but none was to be found. He rode home, but the singing had
so deeply touched his heart, that every day he went out into the forest
and listened to it.

Once when he was thus standing behind a tree, he saw that a Witch came
there, and he heard how she cried:

    “_Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
      Let down thy hair._”

Then Rapunzel let down the braids of her hair, and the Witch climbed up
to her.

“If that is the ladder by which one mounts, I will for once try my
fortune,” said he.

The next day when it began to grow dark, he went to the tower and cried:

    “_Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
      Let down thy hair._”

Immediately the hair fell down, and the King’s Son climbed up.

At first Rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man, such as her eyes
had never yet beheld, came to her. But the King’s Son began to talk
to her quite like a friend, and told her that his heart had been so
stirred, that it had let him have no rest, so he had been forced to see
her.

Then Rapunzel lost her fear, and when he asked her if she would take
him for her husband, and she saw that he was young and handsome, she
thought, “He will love me more than old Dame Gothel does;” and she said
yes, and laid her hand in his.

She said also, “I will willingly go away with you, but I do not know
how to get down. Bring with you a skein of silk every time that you
come, and I will weave a ladder with it. When that is ready I will
descend, and you will take me on your horse.”

They agreed that until that time, he should come to her every evening,
for the old woman came by day. The Witch remarked nothing of this,
until once Rapunzel said to her, “Tell me, Dame Gothel, how it happens
that you are so much heavier for me to draw up, than the young King’s
Son--he is with me in a moment.”

“Ah! you wicked Child!” cried the Witch. “What do I hear you say!
I thought I had separated you from all the world, and yet you have
deceived me!”

In her anger she clutched Rapunzel’s beautiful tresses, wrapped them
twice round her left hand, seized a pair of scissors with the right,
and _snip, snap,_ they were cut off, and the lovely braids lay on the
ground. And she was so pitiless that she took poor Rapunzel into a
desert, where she had to live in great grief and misery.

On the same day, however, that she cast out Rapunzel, the Witch, in the
evening, fastened the braids of hair which she had cut off, to the hook
of the window; and when the King’s Son came and cried:

    “_Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
      Let down thy hair,_”

she let the hair down.

The King’s Son ascended. He did not find his dearest Rapunzel above,
but the Witch, who gazed at him with wicked and venomous looks.

“Aha!” she cried mockingly, “you would fetch your dearest! But the
beautiful bird sits no longer singing in the nest. The cat has got it,
and will scratch out your eyes as well. Rapunzel is lost to you! You
will never see her more!”

The King’s Son was beside himself with grief and in his despair he
leapt down from the tower. He escaped with his life, but the thorns
into which he fell, pierced his eyes. Then he wandered quite blind
about the forest, ate nothing but roots and berries, and did nothing
but lament and weep over the loss of his dearest wife.

Thus he roamed about in misery for some years, and at length came to
the desert where Rapunzel lived in wretchedness. He heard a voice,
and it seemed so familiar to him that he went toward it. When he
approached, Rapunzel knew him, and fell on his neck and wept. Two of
her tears wetted his eyes and they grew clear again, and he could see
with them as before.

He led her to his Kingdom where he was joyfully received, and they
lived for a long time, happy and contented.


