
THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN LITTLE KIDS


There was once on a time, an old Goat who had seven little Kids, and
loved them with all the love of a mother for her children.

One day, she wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food. So
she called all seven to her and said, “Dear Children, I have to go
into the forest. Be on your guard against the Wolf. If he come in, he
will devour you all--skin, hair, and all. The wretch often disguises
himself; but you will know him at once by his rough voice and his black
feet.”

The Kids said, “Dear Mother, we will take good care of ourselves. You
may go away without any anxiety.”

Then the old one bleated, and went on her way with an easy mind.

It was not long before some one knocked at the house-door, and cried,
“Open the door, dear Children! Your mother is here, and has brought
something back with her for each of you.”

But the little Kids knew that it was the Wolf, by his rough voice. “We
will not open the door,” cried they; “you are not our mother. She has
a soft, pleasant voice, but your voice is rough. You are the Wolf!”

Then the Wolf went away to a shopkeeper, and bought a great lump of
chalk, ate this and made his voice soft with it. Then he came back,
knocked at the door of the house, and cried, “Open the door, dear
Children! Your mother is here and has brought something back with her
for each of you.”

But the Wolf had laid his black paws against the window, and the
children saw them, and cried, “We will not open the door, our mother
has not black feet like you. You are the Wolf!”

Then the Wolf ran to a baker, and said, “I have hurt my feet, rub some
dough over them for me.”

And when the baker had rubbed his feet over, he ran to the miller and
said, “Strew some white meal over my feet for me.” The miller thought
to himself, “The Wolf wants to deceive some one,” and refused. But the
Wolf said, “If you will not do it, I will devour you.” Then the miller
was afraid, and made his paws white for him. Yes! so are men!

Now, the wretch went for the third time to the house-door, knocked at
it, and said, “Open the door for me, Children! Your dear little mother
has come home, and has brought every one of you something from the
forest with her.”

The little Kids cried, “First show us your paws that we may know if you
are our dear little mother.”

Then he put his paws in through the window. And when the Kids saw that
they were white, they believed all that he said, and opened the door.
But who should come in but _the Wolf_!

[Illustration: THE LITTLE KIDS CRIED, “FIRST SHOW US YOUR PAWS”]

They were terrified and wanted to hide themselves. One sprang under the
table, the second into the bed, the third into the stove, the fourth
into the kitchen, the fifth into the cupboard, the sixth under the
washing-bowl, and the seventh into the clock-case. But the Wolf found
them all and made no delay, but swallowed one after the other down his
throat. The youngest in the clock-case was the only one he did not find.

When the Wolf had satisfied his appetite, he took himself off, laid
himself down under a tree in the green meadow outside, and began to
sleep.

Soon afterward, the old Goat came home again from the forest. Ah! what
a sight she saw there! The house-door stood wide open. The table,
chairs, and benches were thrown down, the washing-bowl lay broken to
pieces, and the quilts and pillows were pulled off the bed.

She sought her children, but they were nowhere to be found. She called
them one after another by name, but no one answered. At last, when she
called the youngest, a soft voice cried, “Dear Mother, I am in the
clock-case.”

She took the Kid out, and it told her that the Wolf had come and had
eaten all the others. Then you may imagine how she wept over her poor
children!

At length, in her grief she went out, and the youngest Kid ran with
her. When they came to the meadow, there lay the Wolf by the tree and
he was snoring so loud that the branches shook. She looked at him on
every side and saw that something was moving and struggling in his
stomach. “Ah!” said she, “is it possible that my poor children, whom he
has swallowed down for his supper, can be still alive?”

Then the Kid had to run home and fetch scissors, and a needle and
thread, and the Goat cut open the monster’s stomach. Hardly had she
made one cut, than a little Kid thrust its head out, and when she had
cut farther, all six sprang out one after another, and were all still
alive, and had suffered no hurt whatever, for in his greediness the
monster had swallowed them whole.

What rejoicing there was! They embraced their dear mother, and jumped
like a tailor at his wedding. The mother, however, said, “Now go and
look for some big stones. We will fill the wicked beast’s stomach with
them, while he is asleep.”

Then the seven Kids dragged the stones thither with all speed, and put
as many of them into his stomach as they could get in. And the mother
sewed him up again in the greatest haste; so that he was not aware of
anything and never once stirred.

When the Wolf had had his sleep out, he got on his legs, and as the
stones in his stomach made him very thirsty, he wanted to go to a well
to drink. But when he began to walk and to move about, the stones in
his stomach knocked against each other and rattled. Then cried he:

    “_What rumbles and tumbles
      Against my poor bones?
      I thought ’twas six Kids,
      But it’s only big stones!_”

And when he got to the well and stooped over the water and was just
about to drink, the heavy stones made him fall in. There was no help
for it, but he had to drown miserably!

When the seven Kids saw that, they came running to the spot and cried
aloud, “The Wolf is dead! The Wolf is dead!” and danced for joy round
about the well with their mother.



