
THE POOR MILLER’S BOY AND THE CAT


In a certain mill, lived an old miller who had neither wife nor child.
Three apprentices served under him.

As they had been with him several years, he one day said to them, “I
am old, and want to sit in the chimney-corner. Go out, and whichsoever
of you brings me the best horse, to him will I give the mill. And in
return for it, he shall take care of me till my death.”

The third of the boys was, however, the drudge, who was looked on as
foolish by the others. They begrudged the mill to him, and afterward he
would not have it.

Then all three went out together, and when they came to the village,
the two said to stupid Hans, “You may just as well stay here; as long
as you live you will never get a horse.”

Hans, however, went with them, and when it was night they came to a
cave in which they lay down to sleep. The two sharp ones waited until
Hans had fallen asleep, then they got up, and went away leaving him
where he was. They thought they had done a very clever thing, but it
was certain to turn out ill for them.

When the sun arose, and Hans woke up, he was lying in a deep cavern. He
looked around on every side and exclaimed, “Oh, alas! where am I?”

Then he got up and clambered out of the cave, into the forest, thinking:

“Here I am quite alone and deserted, how shall I obtain a horse now?”

Whilst he was thus walking full of thought, he met a small Tabby-Cat
which said quite kindly, “Hans, where are you going?”

“Alas, you cannot help me.”

“I well know your desire,” said the Cat. “You wish to have a beautiful
horse. Come with me, and be my faithful servant for seven years, and
then I will give you a horse more beautiful than any you have ever seen
in your whole life.”

“Well, this is a wonderful Cat!” thought Hans, “but I am determined to
see if she is telling the truth.”

So she took him with her into her enchanted castle, where there were
nothing but cats who were her servants. They leapt nimbly upstairs and
downstairs, and were merry and happy.

In the evening when they sat down to dinner, three of them had to make
music. One played the bassoon, the other the fiddle, and the third put
the trumpet to his lips, and blew out his cheeks as much as he possibly
could.

When they had dined, the table was carried away, and the Cat said,
“Now, Hans, come and dance with me.”

“No,” said he, “I won’t dance with a pussy cat. I have never done that
yet.”

“Then take him to bed,” said she to the cats.

So one of them lighted him to his bedroom, one pulled his shoes off,
one his stockings, and at last one of them blew out the candle.

Next morning they returned and helped him out of bed, one put his
stockings on for him, one tied his garters, one brought his shoes, one
washed him, and one dried his face with her tail.

“That feels very soft!” said Hans.

He, however, had to serve the Cat, and chop some wood every day. And
to do that, he had an axe of silver, while the wedge and saw were of
silver and the mallet of copper. So he chopped the wood small.

He stayed there in the house and had good meat and drink, but never saw
any one but the Tabby-Cat and her servants.

Once she said to him, “Go and mow my meadow, and dry the grass,” and
gave him a scythe of silver, and a whetstone of gold, but bade him
deliver them up again carefully.

So Hans went thither, and did what he was bidden, and when he had
finished the work, he carried the scythe, whetstone, and hay to the
house, and asked if it was not yet time for her to give him his reward.

“No,” said the Cat, “you must first do something more for me of the
same kind. There is timber of silver, carpenter’s axe, square, and
everything that is needful, all of silver, with these build me a small
house.”

Then Hans built the small house, and said that he had now done
everything, and still he had no horse.

Nevertheless, the seven years had gone by with him as if they were six
months. The Cat asked him if he would like to see her horses?

“Yes,” said Hans.

Then she opened the door of the small house. And when she had opened
it, there stood twelve horses,--such horses, so bright and shining,
that his heart rejoiced at the sight of them.

And now she gave him to eat and to drink, and said, “Go home. I will
not give you your horse to take away with you. But in three days’ time,
I will follow you and bring it.”

So Hans set out, and she showed him the way to the mill. She had,
however, never once given him a new coat, and he had been obliged to
keep on his dirty old smock-frock, which he had brought with him, and
which during the seven years had everywhere become too small for him.

When he reached home, the two other apprentices were there again, and
each of them certainly had brought a horse with him. But one of them
was blind and the other lame. They asked Hans where his horse was.

“It will follow me in three days’ time.”

Then they laughed and said, “Indeed, stupid Hans! where will you get a
horse? It will be a fine one!”

Hans went into the parlor, but the miller said he should not sit down
to table for he was so ragged and torn, that they would all be ashamed
of him if any one came in. So they gave him a mouthful of food outside.

At night, when they went to rest, the two others would not let him have
a bed, and at last he was forced to creep into the goose-house, and lie
down on a little hard straw.

In the morning, when he awoke, the three days had passed, and a coach
came with six horses and they shone so bright that it was delightful to
see them!--and a servant brought a seventh as well, which was for the
poor miller’s boy.

And a magnificent Princess alighted from the coach, and went into the
mill. And this Princess was the little Tabby-Cat whom poor Hans had
served for seven years.

She asked the miller where the miller’s boy and drudge was.

Then the miller said, “We will not have him here in the mill, he is so
ragged. He is lying in the goose-house.”

Then the King’s Daughter said that they were to fetch him immediately.

So they brought him; and he had to hold his little smock together to
cover himself.

Her servants unpacked splendid garments, and washed him and dressed
him. And when it was done, no King could have looked more handsome.

Then the Princess desired to see the horses, which the other
apprentices had brought home with them. One of them was blind and the
other lame. So she ordered her servants to bring the seventh horse.

When the miller saw it, he said such a horse as that had never before
entered his yard.

“And that is for the third miller’s boy,” said she.

“Then he must have the mill,” said the miller.

But the Princess said that the horse was for himself, and that he was
to keep his mill as well. Then she took her faithful Hans, set him in
the coach, and drove away with him.

They first drove to the little house, which he had built with the
silver tools. Behold! it was a great castle! Everything inside it was
of silver and gold!

Then she married him; and he was rich, so rich that he had enough for
all the rest of his life.

After this, let no one say that any one who is silly can never become a
person of importance.


