THE SIX SWANS


Once upon a time, a certain King was hunting in a great forest, and he
chased a wild beast so eagerly that none of his attendants could follow
him. When evening drew near, he stopped and looked around him, and saw
that he had lost his way. He sought a way out, but could find none.
Then he perceived an Old Woman with a head which nodded all the time,
who came toward him, but she was a Witch.

“Good woman,” said he to her, “can you not show me the way through the
forest?”

“Oh, yes, Lord King,” she answered, “that I certainly can, but on one
condition, and if you do not fulfill that, you will never get out of
the forest, and will die of hunger in it.”

“What kind of a condition is it?” asked the King.

“I have a daughter,” said the old woman, “who is as beautiful as any
one in the world, and well deserves to be your wife. If you will make
her your Queen, I will show you the way out of the forest.”

In the anguish of his heart the King consented, and the old woman led
him to her little hut, where her daughter was sitting by the fire. She
received the King as if she had been expecting him. He saw that she was
very beautiful, but still she did not please him, and he could not look
at her without secret horror.

After he had taken the maiden up on his horse, the old woman showed him
the way, and the King reached his royal palace again, where the wedding
was celebrated.

The King had already been married once, and had by his first wife,
seven children, six boys and a girl, whom he loved better than anything
else in the world. As he now feared that the new Queen might not treat
them well, and even do them some injury, he took them to a lonely
castle which stood in the midst of a forest. It lay concealed, and the
way was so difficult to find, that he himself would not have found it
at all, if a Wise Woman had not given him a ball of yarn with wonderful
properties. When he threw it down before him, it unrolled itself and
showed him his path.

The King, however, went so frequently to visit his dear children, that
the Queen noticed his absence. She was curious and wanted to know what
he did when he was alone in the forest. She gave a great deal of money
to his servants, and they betrayed the secret to her, and told her
likewise of the ball which alone could point out the way.

And now she knew no rest until she had learnt where the King kept the
ball of yarn. Then she made little shirts of white silk, and as she had
learnt the art of witchcraft from her mother, she sewed a charm inside
them. And one day, when the King had ridden forth to hunt, she took the
little shirts and went into the forest, and the ball showed her the
way.

The children, who saw from a distance that some one was approaching,
thought that their dear father was coming to them, and full of joy,
ran to meet him. Then she threw one of the little shirts over each of
them. And no sooner had the shirts touched their bodies than they were
changed into Swans, and flew away over the forest.

The Queen went home quite delighted, and thought she had got rid of all
the children, but the girl had not run out with her brothers, and the
Queen knew nothing about her.

Next day, the King went to visit his children, but found no one but the
little girl.

“Where are your brothers?” asked the King.

“Alas, dear Father,” she answered, “they have gone away and left me
alone!” and she told him that she had seen from her little window, how
her brothers had flown away over the forest in the shape of Swans. And
she showed him the feathers, which they had let fall in the courtyard,
and which she had picked up.

The King mourned, but he did not think that the Queen had done this
wicked deed. And as he feared that the girl also would be stolen from
him, he wanted to take her away. But she was afraid of the Queen,
and entreated the King to let her stay just one night more in the
forest-castle.

The poor girl thought, “I can no longer remain here. I will go and seek
my brothers.” And when night came, she ran away, and went straight into
the forest.

She walked the whole night long, and next day also without stopping,
until she could go no farther for weariness. Then she saw a forest-hut,
and went into it, and found a room with six little beds. She did not
venture to get into any of them, but crept under one, and lay down
on the hard ground, to pass the night there. Just before sunset she
heard a rustling, and saw six Swans come flying in at the window.
They alighted on the ground and blew at each other, and blew all the
feathers off, and their swan’s skins stripped off like a shirt.

Then the maiden looked at them and recognized her brothers. She
rejoiced and crept forth from beneath the bed. The brothers were not
less delighted to see their little sister, but their joy was short.

“Here can you not abide,” they said to her. “This is a shelter for
robbers. If they come home and find you, they will kill you.”

“But can you not protect me?” asked the little sister.

“No,” they replied, “only for one quarter of an hour each evening, can
we lay aside our swan’s skins and have our human form. After that, we
are once more turned into Swans.”

The little sister wept, and said, “Can you not be set free?”

“Alas, no,” they answered, “the conditions are too hard! For six years
you may neither speak nor laugh, and in that time you must sew together
six little shirts of Star-Flowers for us. And if one single word falls
from your lips, all your work will be lost.”

And when the brothers had said this, the quarter of an hour was over,
and they flew out of the window again as Swans.

[Illustration: THE PRINCESS WENT OUT AND GATHERED STAR-FLOWERS]

The maiden, however, resolved to deliver her brothers, even if it
should cost her her life. She left the hut, went into the midst of the
forest, seated herself on a tree, and there passed the night. Next
morning, she went out and gathered Star-Flowers and began to sew.
She could not speak to any one, and she had no wish to laugh. She sat
there and looked at nothing but her work.

When she had spent a long time there, it came to pass that the King of
the country was hunting in the forest, and his huntsmen came to the
tree on which the maiden was sitting.

They called to her, and said, “Who are you?” But she made no answer.
“Come down to us,” said they. “We will not do you any harm.”

She only shook her head. As they pressed her further with questions,
she threw her golden necklace down to them, and thought to content them
with that. They, however, did not cease, and then she threw her girdle
down to them, and as this also was to no use, her garters, and little
by little everything which she had on that she could do without, until
she had nothing left but her shift. The huntsmen, however, did not let
themselves be turned aside by that, but climbed the tree and fetched
the maiden down and led her before the King.

The King asked, “Who are you? What are you doing on the tree?”

But she did not answer. He put the question in every language that he
knew, but she remained as mute as a fish. As she was so beautiful, the
King’s heart was touched, and he was smitten with a great love for her.
He put his mantle on her, took her before him on his horse, and carried
her to his castle.

Then he caused her to be dressed in rich garments, and she shone in her
beauty like bright daylight, but no word could be drawn from her. He
placed her by his side at table, and her modest bearing and courtesy
pleased him so much, that he said, “She is the one whom I wish to
marry, and no other woman in the world.” And a few days after, he
united himself to her.

The King, however, had a wicked mother, who was dissatisfied with his
marriage and spoke ill of the young Queen. “Who knows,” said she, “from
whence comes the creature, who can’t speak? She is not worthy of a
King!”

After a year had passed, when the Queen brought her first child into
the world, the old woman took it away from her and smeared her mouth
with blood as she slept. Then she went to the King and accused the
Queen of being a man-eater. The King would not believe it, and would
not suffer any one to do her injury. She, however, sat continually
sewing at the shirts, and cared for nothing else.

The next time, when she again bore a beautiful boy, the false old
woman used the same treachery, but the King could not bring himself to
believe her words. He said, “She is too pious and good to do anything
of that kind. If she were not dumb, and could defend herself, her
innocence would come to light.”

But when the old woman stole away the newly-born child for the third
time, and accused the Queen, who did not utter one word of defense, the
King could do no otherwise than deliver her over to justice; and she
was sentenced to be burned.

When the day came for the sentence to be executed, it was the last day
of the six years during which she was not to speak or laugh, and she
had delivered her dear brothers from the power of the enchantment. The
six shirts were ready, only the left sleeve of the sixth was wanting.

When, therefore, she was led to the stake, she laid the shirts on her
arm. And when she stood on high and the fire was just going to be
lighted, she looked around and six Swans came flying through the air
toward her. Then she saw that her deliverance was near, and her heart
leapt with joy.

The Swans swept toward her and sank down so that she could throw the
shirts over them. And as they were touched by them, their swan’s skins
fell off, and her brothers stood in their own form before her, vigorous
and handsome. The youngest lacked only his left arm, and had in its
place a swan’s wing on his shoulder.

They embraced and kissed each other, and the Queen went to the King,
who was greatly moved, and she began to speak, and said, “Dearest
Husband, now I may speak and declare to you that I am innocent, and
falsely accused.” And she told him of the treachery of the old woman
who had taken away her three children, and hidden them.

To the great joy of the King, they were brought back. And as a
punishment, the wicked woman was bound to the stake and burned to ashes.

But the King and the Queen, with their six brothers, lived many years
in happiness and peace.
